So the third and final issue to think
through is we need to make sure that we
pay the piper, that we keep these N
variance maintained.
We know that if they're satisfied than we
have this great way of finding the best
edge in each iteration, we just do an
extractment But how do we make sure that
these N variance stay maintained
throughout the algorithm?
So, to get a feel for the issues that
arise in maintaining of the invariants,
in specific, invariant number two, and
also to make sure we're all on the same
page with respect to the definition of
key value of the vertices in the heap.
Let's go through an example.
So in this example, I've drawn in the
picture a graph that has six vertices.
in effect we've already run three
iterations of Prim's Algorithm, so four
of the six vertices are already in
capital X, the remaining two vertices V
and W are not yet an X, they're in V
minus X.
So, for five of the edges, I've given
them a cost labeled in blue.
For the other edges,
it's not relevant for this question what
their edge costs are.
So you don't have to worry about it.
So, the question is the following.
So given our semantics of how we define
keys for vertices that are not in X, so
in this case the vertices V and W.
What are their current key values
supposed to be?
So those are the first two numbers I want
you to tell me.
What's the current key value of V and W?
And then secondly, after we run one more
iteration of Prim's algorithm.
Then what is the new key value of the
vertex W supposed to be?
So the correct answer is the fourth one.
Let's see why,
so first let's remember the semantics of
keys.
What's the key supposed to be?
It's supposed to be amongst, all the
edges.
That on the one hand, are incidents to
the vertex.
And on the other hand, are crossing the
cuts.
It's the cheapest cost of any of those
edges.
So, for the node V, there's four incident
edges with costs one, two, four, and
five.
The one is not crossing the cut, the two,
four, and five are crossing the cut.
The cheapest of those is two.
So, that's why V's current key value is
two.
For the node V, the node W, it has two
incident edges, a one and a ten.
.
The one is not crossing the cut.
The ten is.
It's the only candidate crossing the cut,
so its key value is ten.
So the third part of the question says,
what about when we execute one more
iteration of Prim's algorithm?
So, what is Prim's algorithm going to do?
Well, it's going to move the edge with
the smallest key from the right hand side
to the left hand side.
V has a key value of two, w has a key
value of ten, so, V is going to be the
one that gets moved from the right hand
side to the left hand side.
So, once that happens, we now have a new
set capital X with a fifth vertex, V is
now a member, so the new value of X is
everything except for the vertex W Now,
the key point is that, as we've changed
the set capital X, the frontier has
changed.
The current cut has changed.
So of course, it's a different set of
edges that are crossing this new cut.
Some have disappeared, and some are newly
crossing it.
The ones that have disappeared are the
two and the four and the five.
Anything between the vertex that got
moved that was already spanning, going to
the left hand side has now been sucked
inside of capital X.
On the other hand, the edge VW which was
previously buried internal to V minus X,
with one of it's endpoints being pulled
to the left hand side.
It is now crossing the cut.
So why do we care well the point is W's T
value has now changed it use to have only
one incident edge crossing the cut the
other across ten now with a new cut it
has two incident edges both the one and
the ten are crossing the cut.
The cheapest of those two edges is of
course the edges of cost one and that now
determines its key value its dropped from
ten to one.
So the take away from this quiz is that
well, on the one hand, having our heap
set up to maintain these two invariants
is great, because a simple extract min
allows us to implement the previous brute
force search in Prim's algorithm.
On the other hand, the extractions screws
things up.
So it messes up the semantics of our key
values.
We may, may need to recompute keys for
the vertices.
So in this next slide I'm going to show
you the piece of pseudocode you'd use to
recompute keys in the light of an
evolving frontier.
Fortunately, restoring in varient number
two after an extract min is not so
painful the reason being is that the
damages done by an extract min are local.
More specifically, let's think about what
are the edges that might be crossing the
cut now that were not previously crossing
the cut?
Well the only vertex whose membership in
these sets has changed is V so they have
to be edges that are incident to V.
If the other end point was already in X
then we don't care this edge has just
been sucked into X, we never have to
worry about it.
But if the other end points, so if this
edge is incident to v if the other end
point w is not an x.
Then with V being pulled over the, the
left hand side.
Now this edge spans the frontier when
previously it did not.
So the edges we care about are incident
to V with the other N point outside of X.
And so our plan is just the obvious one,
which is for each dangerous vertex.
Each vertex incident to V where the other
endpoint W is not an X.
We just follow to the other endpoint W,
and we just recompute its key, and we
just do that for all of the relevant W's.
So that recomputation necessary is not
difficult, there's basically two cases.
So this other end point W now it has one
extra candidate edge crossing the cut.
Namely the one that's also incident on V.
The vertex that just moved.
So I did this new edge VW is the cheapest
local candidate for W, or it's not.
And we just take the smaller of those two
options.
So that completes the high level
description of how you maintain
invariants one and two throughout this
heap-based implementation of Prim's
algorithms.
So each iteration, you do an extract min,
from the extract min you run the
pseudocode to restore invariant number
two, and you're good to go for the next
iteration.
So for those of you who want not just the
conceptual understanding of this
implementation, but really want to get
down to the any degree. You want to dot
all the I's and cross all the T's. A
subtle point you might want to think
through is how it is you implement this
deletion from a heap.
The issue is, is deletion from a heap is
generally from a given position.
And so here I'm only talking about
deleting a vertex from a heap, that
doesn't quite tight check.
Really what you want to see is delete the
vertex at position I from a heap.
So really pulling this off,
the natural way to do it is have some
additional bookkeeping to remember which
vertex is at which position in the heap.
So again, for the detail-oriented amongst
you that's something to think through,
but this is the complete conceptual
description of the algorithm.
Let's now move on to the final running
time analysis.
So the first claim is that, the
non-trivial work of this algorithm all
takes place via heap operations.
That is, it suffices to just count the
number of heap operations, each of which
we know is done in logarithmic time.
Okay,
so let's count up all of the heap
operations.
One thing we already talked about,
but I'll mention it here again for
completeness is we do a bunch of inserts
just to initialize the heap in a
pre-processing step.
So after we initialize, we move on to the
main while loop.
Remember, there's exactly N minus one
iterations of that while loop.
And in each one, we extract min exactly
once.
So these were the easy steps.
What you should be concerned about.
Are, the, heap operations, the deletions
and re-insertions that are triggered by
needing to decrease the key avertices
that are not in X.
Indeed, in a single iteration of Prim's
algorithm, in a single move of a vertex
inside of capital X, can necessitate a
large number of heap operations.
So, it's important to think, to count
these operations in the right way, namely
in a edge-centric manner and the claim is
that a single edge of the graph is only
going to trigger a single decrease key
pair of.
Operations a single insertion deletion
combo.
We can even pinpoint the moment in time
at which we're going to have this inser,
this deletion and reinsertion.
It's going to be when the first of the
endpoints, so either V or W, the first
iteration at which one of those gets
sucked into the left-hand side capital X,
that's going to trigger the
insert-delete, potentially for the other
endpoint.
When the second endpoint gets sucked into
the left-hand side, you don't care,
because the other endpoint has already
been taken out of the heap,
there's no need to maintain its key.
So that means that the number of heap
operations is almost twice the number of
vertices plus almost twice the number of
edges.
We're again going to use this fact that
the input graph is connected and
therefore the number of edges is
asymptotically at least the number of
vertices.
So we can say that the number of heap
operations is at most a constant factor
times the number of edges, M.
As we've discussed every heap operation
runs in time logarithmic in the number of
objects in the heap so that's going to be
Log N in this case so we get an overall
running time of O of M times Log N.
So this is now a quite impressive running
time for the really quite non-trivial
minimum cost spanning tree problem.
Of course we'd love to do even better.
If we could shave off the Log N factor
and be linear in the input, that would be
even more awesome.
But we gotta feel pretty good about this
running time.
Right?
This is only a Log N factor slower than
what it takes to read the input.
This is the same kind of running time
we're getting for sorting.
So this actually puts the minimum
spanning tree problem into the class of
four free primitives.
If you have a graph and it fits in the
main memory of your computer, this
algorithm is so fast.
Maybe you don't even know why you care
about the minimum spinning shaver graph.
Why not do it?
It's basically cost-less.
That's how fast this algorithm is.